# Methods

## Overview

![**Summary of steps used to decontaminate genomes with charcoal.**
In the first stage of the pipeline, contamination detection occurs by comparing the taxonomic assignment of each contig in a genome against all other contigs. 
Contigs with inconsistent taxonomy are flagged as contaminants, by default if they differ at the order level or above.
The results of this step are summarized to report the contaminating genomes, the number of contaminant contigs and basepairs at each level of taxonomy, and other metrics like the fraction of the genome that was identifiable and the fraction that was assignable to the majority lineage.
The outputs of the first stage of the pipeline can then be used in any of three additional reporting steps.
First, contamination can be verified by aligning the contaminant contigs against their identified matching reference genome, and the mappings can be visualized.
Second, an html document can be produced that gives an overview of the contamination in each genome.
Lastly, the contaminant contigs can be separated out from the non-contaminant contigs, writing two separate FASTA files per genome.
](images/charcoal_overview.png){#fig:overview}

To identify contamination, charcoal first creates a FracMinHash sketch for each contiguous sequence ("contig") in an input genome. 
Charcoal then identifies all genomes in a database ("reference genomes") that share sequence overlap with the input genome using sourmash `prefetch`.
Subsequent operations subset the original database to include only the genomes identified by `prefetch`, reducing search volumes. 
Using these matches, charcoal uses sourmash `gather` to identify the minimum set of genomes that cover (or contain) the k-mers in each contig [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838].
Charcoal then determines the taxonomic lineage of each contig using a lineage spreadsheet that records the taxonomy of each reference genome in the database; the taxonomic assignment occurs at the lowest common ancestor of all taxonomic assignments given to a contig.
If there is an exact match between the input genome and a genome in the database, this match is removed to allow decontamination to continue.

Charcoal compares the taxonomic lineage of each contig against the lineage of the input genome. 
If the contig has a different lineage before or at the configured taxonomic rank (order by default) than that of the majority lineage, the contig is considered a contaminant. 
For each contig, charcoal reports the fraction of identified hashes (total and to each major and minor lineage), an estimate of contaminated base pairs (at each taxonomic rank match), as well as the fraction of contigs and base pairs unable to be identified.

The input genome lineage can be user-provided, or it can be determined by charcoal via majority vote of all lineages assigned to all contigs. 
If the lineage is determined by charcoal, by default a minimum 10% of the input genome must have been assigned a taxonomic lineage, and 20% of assigned sequences must match to the majority lineage.
If these specifications are not met, charcoal will not decontaminate the input genome unless the user specifies a lineage. 
The user can optionally specify a lineage (e.g. d__Eukaryota), and charcoal will remove contigs that have a lineage different from the user-specified one. 
This allows charcoal to remove contigs from an input genome when some contigs from that genome occur in the database and when the input genome is not related to anything in a database. 
Charcoal reports whether the provided lineage agrees with k-mer classification at or above the genus level.

After the initial stage of contaminant detection, charcoal can perform additional tasks to verify, summarize, or remove the contaminant sequences. 
Contaminant verification downloads the reference genome sequence for any genome that was detected among the input genome contigs and aligns the contigs against those genomes using mashmap [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty597]. 
Contaminant removal separates "clean" from "dirty" contigs and outputs each set into a FASTA file. 
Importantly, charcoal will not remove a contig if it is unidentifiable, whether it is too short to be sketched or does not contain sequences in the reference database. 
While these contigs could still be contaminants, charcoal assumes contigs are clean for which it has no information. 
Therefore, charcoal will fail to detect contamination for very short contigs which contain no selected k-mers, as well as contigs with novel DNA content. 
Lastly, charcoal has a report feature that summarizes and visualizes the taxonomic lineages detected in each input genome as well as the alignments between the input genome and reference genomes.

Sourmash `prefetch` is the most compute intensive step in the decontamination process. 
When using the GTDB rs207 representative database, this step does not exceed 8GB of RAM.

+ statement that charcoal is database dependent (probably can go in last paragraph with RAM/CPU considerations)

## Availability and dependencies

Charcoal is written in python3 and can be installed via pip as charcoal-bio.
The core algorithms (contaminant detection and removal) depend on sourmash and snakemake. 
Contaminant verification depends on lxml and mashmap [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty597].
Reporting depends on mummer, papermill, notebook, and plotly [@doi:10.1002/0471250953.bi1003s00].
The source code is available at github.com/dib-lab/charcoal.
ZENODO DOI.

### Datasets and benchmarking
