# Results

## Charcoal detected and removed contamination from roughly one quarter of GTDB genomes

![**Charcoal identified contamination in approximately one quarter of GTDB rs207 genomes, distributed generally across different types of genomes.**
**A)** Bar plot depicting the number of genomes in GTDB contaminated at the order level.
**B)** Bar plot separating genomes in GTDB by their inclusion in NCBI's RefSeq. Both GenBank and RefSeq genomes are contaminated.
**C)** Bar plot separating representative genomes in GTDB from non-representative genomes. While some representative genomes are contaminated, non-representative genomes are more likely to be contaminated.
**D)** Violin plots depicting the mean contig length within genomes in GTDB, separated by contamination profile. Genomes with longer contigs are less likely to be contaminated. On average, the contigs in contaminated genomes were 380,504 base pairs shorter than contigs in non-contaminated genomes.
**E)** Bar plot that separates genomes by NCBI category which specifies where source material was derived from.
**F)** Bar plot depicting the number of genomes in each order, colored by contamination status. Genomes are grouped by taxonomic lineage up to the order level.
](images/charcoal_gtdb.png){#fig:charcoal_gtdb}

Using charcoal to detect and remove contamination, approximately 26% of GTDB rs207 genomes were contaminated at the order level or above (**Figure @fig:charcoal_gtdb A**).
Contamination was identified 

## Charcoal and CheckM identify the same set of not contaminated genomes

Charcoal is more conservative than CheckM contamination estimation at the order level.
whereas 80.2% of genomes are estimated to have some contamination using CheckM.
    + Both tools agree on the majority of genomes with no contamination

At the family level, charcoal identified contamination in XX% of genomes, suggesting that adjusting taxonomy may improve agreement with checkm.

Do plot -- at what % checkm contam best overlaps with order level charcoal?

+ run checkm on clean

## Databases

+ gtdb rs207 reps vs gtdb rs202 reps
+ gtdb rs202 reps vs gtdb rs202 full (replace evnetually with rs207)
    + short contigs missed
    + ram considerations
    + future development: species-level database

**old results outline:**

+ charcoal vs. checkm
  + charcoal vs. checkm: mgnify, tara
  + prokka on charcoal dirty
+ charcoal vs. refineM and magpurify
+ verification of contamination/contam case studies
  + case studies
  + user-provided lineages
  + cDBG/spacegraphcats?
  + user-specified lineages
