# Discussion

## Benefits and drawbacks of charcoal. 

Commonly, the completeness and contamination of MAGs is estimated through the presence and sequence composition of single-copy marker genes [@doi:10.1101/gr.186072.114; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351], with MAGs that reach >90% completeness and <5% contamination considered high quality [@doi:10.1101/gr.186072.114]. 
Using these genes to estimate contamination leads to two important biases. 
First, given the assumption that marker genes are universally present in genomes, if a marker gene resides on a contaminant sequence but no other sequence for that marker gene is present in the genome, it will not be detected as contamination [@doi:10.1101/gr.186072.114; @doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02264]. 
When a MAG is substantially complete, this may lead to a small underestimation in contamination (~3% [@doi:10.1101/gr.186072.114]), but as completeness decreases, contamination may be substantially underestimated [@doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02264]. 
Second, contiguous sequences which do not contain marker sequences are not included among contamination estimates [@doi:10.1101/gr.186072.114]. 
Charcoal avoids these pitfalls by using k-mers, which are sampled evenly across the genome [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838]. 
We envisage charcoal acting as a complementary analysis tool to CheckM.
  
While charcoal avoids the above biases, it is itself biased against detecting contamination in very short contigs. 
By default, a minimum of three k-mers must be taxonomically annotated on a contig for a contig to be removed; because contigs are first sketched, many short contigs will not contain three k-mers.

## Future work

+ strain heterogeneity estimation or strain insertion in newick tree using prefetch & clean results
+ completeness estimation, potentially via comparison to conspecifics via genome size
+ database with eukaryotic sequences
+ estimation via protein sequences for divergent organisms not well represented in databases

## Notes

+ fastani is an accepted way to do average nucleotide identity calculate, and it relies on k-mers.
+ from checkm paper:
> Bias in genome quality estimates: Quality estimates based on individual marker genes or collocated marker sets exhibit a bias resulting in completeness being overestimated and contamination being underestimated. This bias is the result of marker genes residing on foreign DNA that are otherwise absent in a genome being mistakenly interpreted as an indication of increased completeness as opposed to contamination. 
+ we don't deal with strain heterogeneity, as this occurs below the species-level aggregation in the LCA
